Hello Viget Labs.
My Labshare toady is on deliberate practice, failure, mind-maps, and mountain biking.
It's about a deep-seated connection between these topics and it's about how that connection can help you be more creative.
And if you've never ridden a mountain bike before I'm also going to try and convince you to ride one.

In order to achieve this goal I need to explain what deliberate practice is.

Deliberate practice is
  Focused Practice
  Measured Practice
  Not a jam session.*
  Practice that is focused on achieving measurable performance gain.

  Here is some good news about practicing:
  You aren't good at it! ... but
  (How is that good news?)
  You aren't supposed to be good at it.

  Deliberate practice isn't performance.
  If you are aren't continuously failing while you practice then you aren't operating beyond your ability and you are wasting your time.
  Deliberate practice should be uncomfortable.*

  It should be painful because

  * Pain is weakness leaving the body.

  Tiger Woods Deliberately Practices
    When Tiger Woods goes to the driving range he doesn't hit 150 golf balls.*
    Tiger Woods hits 150 golf balls 330 yards with a 2 wood into a 5ft circle.
    Effective, Focused, Measurable.
    That raises a question. At that level of specificity there are a million things he could practice.
    How does Tiger know what to work on?
    He has Immediate Feedback from his coach.
    In other words, he has a knowledgeable external perspective that helps to direct the next phase of practice based on the failures of the current phase.
    This is the most important characteristic of effective deliberate practice.

    And if immediate feedback is the most important characteristic of deliberate practice
    Then immediacy is the most important characteristic of feedback because

    * The value of feedback is inversely proportional to the amount of time between the feedback and the practice.

    In other words, the quicker the feedback the greater the value.

  Now we have a pretty good understanding of what it takes to grow a particular skill.
  *Growth Recipe*
  Focused practice sessions that stress your ability and are directed by immediate feedback.

  This method of practice has a proven impact on one's ability to perform.
  But I think it also has an impact on one's ability to be more creative due to the relationship between practice and failure.
  To understand this relationship and how it can influence creativity we have to look at a particular tool that has always fascinated me.

The Mind Map
  You may or may not know, I've long held the mind map in mystical regard*.
  Until I saw this: http://frankchimero.com/idea/ *
  And then it made perfect sense to me.

  You mind map by starting with a subject.
  You identify and record associations as branches off of the subject.
  Rinse, repeat.
  Then release the power by making combinations between distant pairs!

  Frank uses the mind map to draw a connection between belt buckles and black belts and comes up with the idea for a black belt belt buckle.
  Brilliant!

  This is awesome because
    Creative ideas usually come from a combination of seemingly unrelated ideas in your mind.
    We'll call these unrelated ideas, *fractional ideas*.
    They are ideas that are patiently waiting to be combined with some other idea floating around in the back of your head.
    The individual associations you record on a mind map are these types of ideas.
    Often these fractional ideas ruminate in the back of your mind for a long time before something happens that triggers your mind to combine them.
    Encouraging the connection of these ideas is the key to generating awesome new ideas.
    Mind maps are the perfect tool for the job.

    But the value of a mind map is only as good as the quality of the associations you identify.
    In order to come up with valuable associations you must *draw from your experience*.
    And the best way to expand your experience is to *embrace failure*.

  This is not an easy task.
  *In order to embrace failure you have to manage it, and this is where deliberate practice has a profound impact.
    Structure practice so that you are operating around the zone in which you fail.
    Have a clear definition of failure while you practice.
    This removes the ambiguity that comes from cascading failures where one failure is caused by a previous failure.
    We want to be able to stop the instant we mess up, get feedback and take another crack at it.
    *This approach allows us to *Fail Fast*

    Fast failures are like muscle building for your confidence.
    For example, while you practice how to play guitar you are also training your subconscious mind to accept failure as a necessary step towards growth.
    In this context, you begin to *identify failure as an opportunity*.
    When you start to see failure as an opportunity you gain the confidence to expand your horizon of experience.

    And by drawing on a wider domain of experience you are able to create mind maps filled with the most valuable associations.

  Idea Recipe
    Embrace failure in order to build the confidence required to engage in new experiences.
    Use mind maps to make connections between the fresh perspective that comes from new experience.

Deliberate practice -enables-> Embrace Failure -confidence-> New Experiences -lead to-> Better Ideas.

New Experiences -> Better Ideas.

How many people here have never been mountain biking?

Then to you folks I suggest:

Mountain Biking -> Better Ideas.

The End.